<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h2>
			<p>On men reprieved by its disdainful mercy, the immortal sea confers in its justice the full privilege of desired unrest. Through the perfect wisdom of its grace they are not permitted to meditate at ease upon the complicated and acrid savour of existence. They must without pause justify their life to the eternal pity that commands toil to be hard and unceasing, from sunrise to sunset, from sunset to sunrise; till the weary succession of nights and days tainted by the obstinate clamour of sages, demanding bliss and an empty heaven, is redeemed at last by the vast silence of pain and labour, by the dumb fear and the dumb courage of men obscure, forgetful, and enduring.</p>
			<p>The master and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBaker coming face to face stared for a moment, with the intense and amazed looks of men meeting unexpectedly after years of trouble. Their voices were gone, and they whispered desperately at one another.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúAnyone missing?‚Äù asked Captain Allistoun.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúNo. All there.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúAnybody hurt?‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúOnly the second mate.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúI will look after him directly. We‚Äôre lucky.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúVery,‚Äù articulated <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBaker, faintly. He gripped the rail and rolled bloodshot eyes. The little grey man made an effort to raise his voice above a dull mutter, and fixed his chief mate with a cold gaze, piercing like a dart.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúGet sail on the ship,‚Äù he said, speaking authoritatively and with an inflexible snap of his thin lips. ‚ÄúGet sail on her as soon as you can. This is a fair wind. At once, sir‚ÅÝ‚ÄîDon‚Äôt give the men time to feel themselves. They will get done up and stiff, and we will never‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ We must get her along now‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ He reeled to a long heavy roll; the rail dipped into the glancing, hissing water. He caught a shroud, swung helplessly against the mate‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ ‚Äúnow we have a fair wind at last‚ÅÝ‚ÄîMake‚ÅÝ‚Äîsail.‚Äù His head rolled from shoulder to shoulder. His eyelids began to beat rapidly. ‚ÄúAnd the pumps‚ÅÝ‚Äîpumps, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBaker.‚Äù He peered as though the face within a foot of his eyes had been half a mile off. ‚ÄúKeep the men on the move to‚ÅÝ‚Äîto get her along,‚Äù he mumbled in a drowsy tone, like a man going off into a doze. He pulled himself together suddenly. ‚ÄúMustn‚Äôt stand. Won‚Äôt do,‚Äù he said with a painful attempt at a smile. He let go his hold, and, propelled by the dip of the ship, ran aft unwillingly, with small steps, till he brought up against the binnacle stand. Hanging on there he looked up in an aimless manner at Singleton, who, unheeding him, watched anxiously the end of the jib-boom‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúSteering gear works all right?‚Äù he asked. There was a noise in the old seaman‚Äôs throat, as though the words had been rattling together before they could come out.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúSteers‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ like a little boat,‚Äù he said, at last, with hoarse tenderness, without giving the master as much as half a glance‚ÅÝ‚Äîthen, watchfully, spun the wheel down, steadied, flung it back again. Captain Allistoun tore himself away from the delight of leaning against the binnacle, and began to walk the poop, swaying and reeling to preserve his balance.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
			<p>The pump-rods, clanking, stamped in short jumps while the flywheels turned smoothly, with great speed, at the foot of the mainmast, flinging back and forth with a regular impetuosity two limp clusters of men clinging to the handles. They abandoned themselves, swaying from the hip with twitching faces and stony eyes. The carpenter, sounding from time to time, exclaimed mechanically: ‚ÄúShake her up! Keep her going!‚Äù <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBaker could not speak, but found his voice to shout; and under the goad of his objurgations, men looked to the lashings, dragged out new sails; and thinking themselves unable to move, carried heavy blocks aloft‚ÅÝ‚Äîoverhauled the gear. They went up the rigging with faltering and desperate efforts. Their heads swam as they shifted their hold, stepped blindly on the yards like men in the dark; or trusted themselves to the first rope at hand with the negligence of exhausted strength. The narrow escapes from falls did not disturb the languid beat of their hearts; the roar of the seas seething far below them sounded continuous and faint like an indistinct noise from another world: the wind filled their eyes with tears, and with heavy gusts tried to push them off from where they swayed in insecure positions. With streaming faces and blowing hair they flew up and down between sky and water, bestriding the ends of yardarms, crouching on foot-ropes, embracing lifts to have their hands free, or standing up against chain ties. Their thoughts floated vaguely between the desire of rest and the desire of life, while their stiffened fingers cast off head-earrings, fumbled for knives, or held with tenacious grip against the violent shocks of beating canvas. They glared savagely at one another, made frantic signs with one hand while they held their life in the other, looked down on the narrow strip of flooded deck, shouted along to leeward: ‚ÄúLight-to!‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ ‚ÄúHaul out!‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ ‚ÄúMake fast!‚Äù Their lips moved, their eyes started, furious and eager with the desire to be understood, but the wind tossed their words unheard upon the disturbed sea. In an unendurable and unending strain they worked like men driven by a merciless dream to toil in an atmosphere of ice or flame. They burnt and shivered in turns. Their eyeballs smarted as if in the smoke of a conflagration; their heads were ready to burst with every shout. Hard fingers seemed to grip their throats. At every roll they thought: Now I must let go. It will shake us all off‚ÅÝ‚Äîand thrown about aloft they cried wildly: ‚ÄúLook out there‚ÅÝ‚Äîcatch the end.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ ‚ÄúReeve clear‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ ‚ÄúTurn this block.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù They nodded desperately; shook infuriated faces, ‚ÄúNo! No! From down up.‚Äù They seemed to hate one another with a deadly hate. The longing to be done with it all gnawed their breasts, and the wish to do things well was a burning pain. They cursed their fate, contemned their life, and wasted their breath in deadly imprecations upon one another. The sailmaker, with his bald head bared, worked feverishly, forgetting his intimacy with so many admirals. The boatswain, climbing up with marlinspikes and bunches of spunyarn rovings, or kneeling on the yard and ready to take a turn with the midship-stop, had acute and fleeting visions of his old woman and the youngsters in a moorland village. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBaker, feeling very weak, tottered here and there, grunting and inflexible, like a man of iron. He waylaid those who, coming from aloft, stood gasping for breath. He ordered, encouraged, scolded. ‚ÄúNow then‚ÅÝ‚Äîto the main topsail now! Tally on to that gantline. Don‚Äôt stand about there!‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúIs there no rest for us?‚Äù muttered voices. He spun round fiercely, with a sinking heart.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúNo! No rest till the work is done. Work till you drop. That‚Äôs what you‚Äôre here for.‚Äù A bowed seaman at his elbow gave a short laugh.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúDo or die,‚Äù he croaked bitterly, then spat into his broad palms, swung up his long arms, and grasping the rope high above his head sent out a mournful, wailing cry for a pull all together. A sea boarded the quarterdeck and sent the whole lot sprawling to leeward. Caps, handspikes floated. Clenched hands, kicking legs, with here and there a spluttering face, stuck out of the white hiss of foaming water. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBaker, knocked down with the rest, screamed‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúDon‚Äôt let go that rope! Hold on to it! Hold!‚Äù And sorely bruised by the brutal fling, they held on to it, as though it had been the fortune of their life. The ship ran, rolling heavily, and the topping crests glanced past port and starboard flashing their white heads. Pumps were freed. Braces were rove. The three topsails and foresail were set. She spurted faster over the water, outpacing the swift rush of waves. The menacing thunder of distanced seas rose behind her‚ÅÝ‚Äîfilled the air with the tremendous vibrations of its voice. And devastated, battered, and wounded she drove foaming to the northward, as though inspired by the courage of a high endeavour.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
			<p>The forecastle was a place of damp desolation. They looked at their dwelling with dismay. It was slimy, dripping; it hummed hollow with the wind, and was strewn with shapeless wreckage like a half-tide cavern in a rocky and exposed coast. Many had lost all they had in the world, but most of the starboard watch had preserved their chests; thin streams of water trickled out of them, however. The beds were soaked; the blankets spread out and saved by some nail squashed under foot. They dragged wet rags from evil-smelling corners, and wringing the water out, recognised their property. Some smiled stiffly. Others looked round blank and mute. There were cries of joy over old waistcoats, and groans of sorrow over shapeless things found among the splinters of smashed bed boards. One lamp was discovered jammed under the bowsprit. Charley whimpered a little. Knowles stumped here and there, sniffing, examining dark places for salvage. He poured dirty water out of a boot, and was concerned to find the owner. Those who, overwhelmed by their losses, sat on the forepeak hatch, remained elbows on knees, and, with a fist against each cheek, disdained to look up. He pushed it under their noses. ‚ÄúHere‚Äôs a good boot. Yours?‚Äù They snarled, ‚ÄúNo‚ÅÝ‚Äîget out.‚Äù One snapped at him, ‚ÄúTake it to hell out of this.‚Äù He seemed surprised. ‚ÄúWhy? It‚Äôs a good boot,‚Äù but remembering suddenly that he had lost every stitch of his clothing, he dropped his find and began to swear. In the dim light cursing voices clashed. A man came in and, dropping his arms, stood still, repeating from the doorstep, ‚ÄúHere‚Äôs a bloomin‚Äô old go! Here‚Äôs a bloomin‚Äô old go!‚Äù A few rooted anxiously in flooded chests for tobacco. They breathed hard, clamoured with heads down. ‚ÄúLook at that Jack!‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ ‚ÄúHere! Sam! Here‚Äôs my shore-going rig spoilt forever.‚Äù One blasphemed tearfully, holding up a pair of dripping trousers. No one looked at him. The cat came out from somewhere. He had an ovation. They snatched him from hand to hand, caressed him in a murmur of pet names. They wondered where he had ‚Äúweathered it out;‚Äù disputed about it. A squabbling argument began. Two men brought in a bucket of fresh water, and all crowded round it; but Tom, lean and mewing, came up with every hair astir and had the first drink. A couple of hands went aft for oil and biscuits.</p>
			<p>Then in the yellow light and in the intervals of mopping the deck they crunched hard bread, arranging to ‚Äúworry through somehow.‚Äù Men chummed as to beds. Turns were settled for wearing boots and having the use of oilskin coats. They called one another ‚Äúold man‚Äù and ‚Äúsonny‚Äù in cheery voices. Friendly slaps resounded. Jokes were shouted. One or two stretched on the wet deck, slept with heads pillowed on their bent arms, and several, sitting on the hatch, smoked. Their weary faces appeared through a thin blue haze, pacified and with sparkling eyes. The boatswain put his head through the door. ‚ÄúRelieve the wheel, one of you‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe shouted inside‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äúit‚Äôs six. Blamme if that old Singleton hasn‚Äôt been there more‚Äôn thirty hours. You are a fine lot.‚Äù He slammed the door again. ‚ÄúMate‚Äôs watch on deck,‚Äù said someone. ‚ÄúHey, Donkin, it‚Äôs your relief!‚Äù shouted three or four together. He had crawled into an empty bunk and on wet planks lay still. ‚ÄúDonkin, your wheel.‚Äù He made no sound. ‚ÄúDonkin‚Äôs dead,‚Äù guffawed someone. ‚ÄúSell ‚Äôis bloomin‚Äô clothes,‚Äù shouted another. ‚ÄúDonkin, if ye don‚Äôt go to the bloomin‚Äô wheel they will sell your clothes‚ÅÝ‚Äîd‚Äôye hear?‚Äù jeered a third. He groaned from his dark hole. He complained about pains in all his bones, he whimpered pitifully. ‚ÄúHe won‚Äôt go,‚Äù exclaimed a contemptuous voice, ‚Äúyour turn, Davis.‚Äù The young seaman rose painfully, squaring his shoulders. Donkin stuck his head out, and it appeared in the yellow light, fragile and ghastly. ‚ÄúI will giv‚Äô yer a pound of tobaccer,‚Äù he whined in a conciliating voice, ‚Äúso soon as I draw it from aft. I will‚ÅÝ‚Äîs‚Äôelp me‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù Davis swung his arm backhanded and the head vanished. ‚ÄúI‚Äôll go,‚Äù he said, ‚Äúbut you will pay for it.‚Äù He walked unsteady but resolute to the door. ‚ÄúSo I will,‚Äù yelped Donkin, popping out behind him. ‚ÄúSo I will‚ÅÝ‚Äîs‚Äôelp me‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ a pound‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ three bob they chawrge.‚Äù Davis flung the door open. ‚ÄúYou will pay my price‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ in fine weather,‚Äù he shouted over his shoulder. One of the men unbuttoned his wet coat rapidly, threw it at his head. ‚ÄúHere, Taffy‚ÅÝ‚Äîtake that, you thief!‚Äù ‚ÄúThank you!‚Äù he cried from the darkness above the swish of rolling water. He could be heard splashing; a sea came on board with a thump. ‚ÄúHe‚Äôs got his bath already,‚Äù remarked a grim shellback. ‚ÄúAye, aye!‚Äù grunted others. Then, after a long silence, Wamibo made strange noises. ‚ÄúHallo, what‚Äôs up with you?‚Äù said someone grumpily. ‚ÄúHe says he would have gone for Davy,‚Äù explained Archie, who was the Finn‚Äôs interpreter generally. ‚ÄúI believe him!‚Äù cried voices.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ ‚ÄúNever mind, Dutchy‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ You‚Äôll do, muddle-head.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Your turn will come soon enough‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ You don‚Äôt know when ye‚Äôre well off.‚Äù They ceased, and all together turned their faces to the door. Singleton stepped in, advanced two paces, and stood swaying slightly. The sea hissed, flowed roaring past the bows, and the forecastle trembled, full of deep murmurs; the lamp flared, swinging like a pendulum. He looked with a dreamy and puzzled stare, as though he could not distinguish the still men from their restless shadows. There were awestruck exclamations:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúHallo, hallo‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ ‚ÄúHow does it look outside now, Singleton?‚Äù Those who sat on the hatch lifted their eyes in silence, and the next oldest seaman in the ship (those two understood one another, though they hardly exchanged three words in a day) gazed up at his friend attentively for a moment, then taking a short clay pipe out of his mouth, offered it without a word. Singleton put out his arm towards it, missed, staggered, and suddenly fell forward, crashing down, stiff and headlong like an uprooted tree. There was a swift rush. Men pushed, crying:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúHe‚Äôs done!‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ ‚ÄúTurn him over!‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ ‚ÄúStand clear there!‚Äù Under a crowd of startled faces bending over him he lay on his back, staring upwards in a continuous and intolerable manner. In the breathless silence of a general consternation, he said in a grating murmur:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúI am all right,‚Äù and clutched with his hands. They helped him up. He mumbled despondently:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúI am getting old‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ old.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúNot you,‚Äù cried Belfast, with ready tact. Supported on all sides, he hung his head.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúAre you better?‚Äù they asked. He glared at them from under his eyebrows with large black eyes, spreading over his chest the bushy whiteness of a beard long and thick.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúOld! old!‚Äù he repeated sternly. Helped along, he reached his bunk. There was in it a slimy soft heap of something that smelt, as does at dead low water a muddy foreshore. It was his soaked straw bed. With a convulsive effort he pitched himself on it, and in the darkness of the narrow place could be heard growling angrily, like an irritated and savage animal uneasy in its den:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúBit of breeze‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ small thing‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ can‚Äôt stand up‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ old!‚Äù He slept at last, high-booted, sou‚Äôwester on head, and his oilskin clothes rustled, when with a deep sighing groan he turned over. Men conversed about him in quiet, concerned whispers. ‚ÄúThis will break‚Äôim up‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ ‚ÄúStrong as a horse‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ ‚ÄúAye. But he ain‚Äôt what he used to be.‚Äù In sad murmurs they gave him up. Yet at midnight he turned out to duty as if nothing had been the matter, and answered to his name with a mournful ‚ÄúHere!‚Äù He brooded alone more than ever, in an impenetrable silence and with a saddened face. For many years he had heard himself called ‚ÄúOld Singleton,‚Äù and had serenely accepted the qualification, taking it as a tribute of respect due to a man who through half a century had measured his strength against the favours and the rages of the sea. He had never given a thought to his mortal self. He lived unscathed, as though he had been indestructible, surrendering to all the temptations, weathering many gales. He had panted in sunshine, shivered in the cold; suffered hunger, thirst, debauch; passed through many trials‚ÅÝ‚Äîknown all the furies. Old! It seemed to him he was broken at last. And like a man bound treacherously while he sleeps, he woke up fettered by the long chain of disregarded years. He had to take up at once the burden of all his existence, and found it almost too heavy for his strength. Old! He moved his arms, shook his head, felt his limbs. Getting old‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ and then? He looked upon the immortal sea with the awakened and groping perception of its heartless might; he saw it unchanged, black and foaming under the eternal scrutiny of the stars; he heard its impatient voice calling for him out of a pitiless vastness full of unrest, of turmoil, and of terror. He looked afar upon it, and he saw an immensity tormented and blind, moaning and furious, that claimed all the days of his tenacious life, and, when life was over, would claim the worn-out body of its slave.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>This was the last of the breeze. It veered quickly, changed to a black southeaster, and blew itself out, giving the ship a famous shove to the northward into the joyous sunshine of the trade. Rapid and white she ran homewards in a straight path, under a blue sky and upon the plain of a blue sea. She carried Singleton‚Äôs completed wisdom, Donkin‚Äôs delicate susceptibilities, and the conceited folly of us all. The hours of ineffective turmoil were forgotten; the fear and anguish of these dark moments were never mentioned in the glowing peace of fine days. Yet from that time our life seemed to start afresh as though we had died and had been resuscitated. All the first part of the voyage, the Indian Ocean on the other side of the Cape, all that was lost in a haze, like an ineradicable suspicion of some previous existence. It had ended‚ÅÝ‚Äîthen there were blank hours: a livid blurr‚ÅÝ‚Äîand again we lived! Singleton was possessed of sinister truth; <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCreighton of a damaged leg; the cook of fame‚ÅÝ‚Äîand shamefully abused the opportunities of his distinction. Donkin had an added grievance. He went about repeating with insistence:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äú‚Ää‚ÄôE said ‚Äôe would brain me‚ÅÝ‚Äîdid yer ‚Äôear? They are goin‚Äô to murder us now for the least little thing.‚Äù We began at last to think it was rather awful. And we were conceited! We boasted of our pluck, of our capacity for work, of our energy. We remembered honourable episodes: our devotion, our indomitable perseverance‚ÅÝ‚Äîand were proud of them as though they had been the outcome of our unaided impulses. We remembered our danger, our toil‚ÅÝ‚Äîand conveniently forgot our horrible scare. We decried our officers‚ÅÝ‚Äîwho had done nothing‚ÅÝ‚Äîand listened to the fascinating Donkin. His care for our rights, his disinterested concern for our dignity, were not discouraged by the invariable contumely of our words, by the disdain of our looks. Our contempt for him was unbounded‚ÅÝ‚Äîand we could not but listen with interest to that consummate artist. He told us we were good men‚ÅÝ‚Äîa ‚Äúbloomin‚Äô condemned lot of good men.‚Äù Who thanked us? Who took any notice of our wrongs? Didn‚Äôt we lead a ‚Äúdorg‚Äôs loife for two poun‚Äô ten a month?‚Äù Did we think that miserable pay enough to compensate us for the risk to our lives and for the loss of our clothes? ‚ÄúWe‚Äôve lost every rag!‚Äù he cried. He made us forget that he, at any rate, had lost nothing of his own. The younger men listened, thinking‚ÅÝ‚Äîthis ‚Äôere Donkin‚Äôs a long-headed chap, though no kind of man, anyhow. The Scandinavians were frightened at his audacities; Wamibo did not understand; and the older seamen thoughtfully nodded their heads making the thin gold earrings glitter in the fleshy lobes of hairy ears. Severe, sunburnt faces were propped meditatively on tattooed forearms. Veined, brown fists held in their knotted grip the dirty white clay of smouldering pipes. They listened, impenetrable, broad-backed, with bent shoulders, and in grim silence. He talked with ardour, despised and irrefutable. His picturesque and filthy loquacity flowed like a troubled stream from a poisoned source. His beady little eyes danced, glancing right and left, ever on the watch for the approach of an officer. Sometimes <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBaker going forward to take a look at the head sheets would roll with his uncouth gait through the sudden stillness of the men; or <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCreighton limped along, smooth-faced, youthful, and more stern than ever, piercing our short silence with a keen glance of his clear eyes. Behind his back Donkin would begin again darting stealthy, sidelong looks.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äú‚Ää‚ÄôEre‚Äôs one of ‚Äôem. Some of yer ‚Äôas made ‚Äôim fast that day. Much thanks yer got for it. Ain‚Äôt ‚Äôee a-drivin‚Äô yer wusse‚Äôn ever?‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Let ‚Äôim slip overboard.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Vy not? It would ‚Äôave been less trouble. Vy not?‚Äù He advanced confidentially, backed away with great effect; he whispered, he screamed, waved his miserable arms no thicker than pipe-stems‚ÅÝ‚Äîstretched his lean neck‚ÅÝ‚Äîspluttered‚ÅÝ‚Äîsquinted. In the pauses of his impassioned orations the wind sighed quietly aloft, the calm sea unheeded murmured in a warning whisper along the ship‚Äôs side. We abominated the creature and could not deny the luminous truth of his contentions. It was all so obvious. We were indubitably good men; our deserts were great and our pay small. Through our exertions we had saved the ship and the skipper would get the credit of it. What had he done? we wanted to know. Donkin asked:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúWhat ‚Äôee could do without hus?‚Äù and we could not answer. We were oppressed by the injustice of the world, surprised to perceive how long we had lived under its burden without realising our unfortunate state, annoyed by the uneasy suspicion of our undiscerning stupidity. Donkin assured us it was all our ‚Äúgood ‚Äôeartedness,‚Äù but we would not be consoled by such shallow sophistry. We were men enough to courageously admit to ourselves our intellectual shortcomings; though from that time we refrained from kicking him, tweaking his nose, or from accidentally knocking him about, which last, after we had weathered the Cape, had been rather a popular amusement. Davis ceased to talk at him provokingly about black eyes and flattened noses. Charley, much subdued since the gale, did not jeer at him. Knowles deferentially and with a crafty air propounded questions such as:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúCould we all have the same grub as the mates? Could we all stop ashore till we got it? What would be the next thing to try for if we got that?‚Äù He answered readily with contemptuous certitude; he strutted with assurance in clothes that were much too big for him as though he had tried to disguise himself. These were Jimmy‚Äôs clothes mostly‚ÅÝ‚Äîthough he would accept anything from anybody; but nobody, except Jimmy, had anything to spare. His devotion to Jimmy was unbounded. He was forever dodging in the little cabin, ministering to Jimmy‚Äôs wants, humouring his whims, submitting to his exacting peevishness, often laughing with him. Nothing could keep him away from the pious work of visiting the sick, especially when there was some heavy hauling to be done on deck. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBaker had on two occasions jerked him out from there by the scruff of the neck to our inexpressible scandal. Was a sick chap to be left without attendance? Were we to be ill-used for attending a shipmate?‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúWhat?‚Äù growled <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBaker, turning menacingly at the mutter, and the whole half-circle like one man stepped back a pace. ‚ÄúSet the topmast stunsail. Away aloft, Donkin, overhaul the gear,‚Äù ordered the mate inflexibly. ‚ÄúFetch the sail along; bend the down-haul clear. Bear a hand.‚Äù Then, the sail set, he would go slowly aft and stand looking at the compass for a long time, careworn, pensive, and breathing hard as if stifled by the taint of unaccountable ill-will that pervaded the ship. ‚ÄúWhat‚Äôs up amongst them?‚Äù he thought. ‚ÄúCan‚Äôt make out this hanging back and growling. A good crowd, too, as they go nowadays.‚Äù On deck the men exchanged bitter words, suggested by a silly exasperation against something unjust and irremediable that would not be denied, and would whisper into their ears long after Donkin had ceased speaking. Our little world went on its curved and unswerving path carrying a discontented and aspiring population. They found comfort of a gloomy kind in an interminable and conscientious analysis of their unappreciated worth; and inspired by Donkin‚Äôs hopeful doctrines they dreamed enthusiastically of the time when every lonely ship would travel over a serene sea, manned by a wealthy and well-fed crew of satisfied skippers.</p>
			<p>It looked as if it would be a long passage. The southeast trades, light and unsteady, were left behind; and then, on the equator and under a low grey sky, the ship, in close heat, floated upon a smooth sea that resembled a sheet of ground glass. Thunder squalls hung on the horizon, circled round the ship, far off and growling angrily, like a troop of wild beasts afraid to charge home. The invisible sun, sweeping above the upright masts, made on the clouds a blurred stain of rayless light, and a similar patch of faded radiance kept pace with it from east to west over the unglittering level of the waters. At night, through the impenetrable darkness of earth and heaven, broad sheets of flame waved noiselessly; and for half a second the becalmed craft stood out with its masts and rigging, with every sail and every rope distinct and black in the centre of a fiery outburst, like a charred ship enclosed in a globe of fire. And, again, for long hours she remained lost in a vast universe of night and silence where gentle sighs wandering here and there like forlorn souls, made the still sails flutter as in sudden fear, and the ripple of a beshrouded ocean whisper its compassion afar‚ÅÝ‚Äîin a voice mournful, immense, and faint.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>When the lamp was put out, and the door thrown wide open, Jimmy, turning on his pillow, could see vanishing beyond the straight line of topgallant rail, the quick, repeated visions of a fabulous world made up of leaping fire and sleeping water. The lightning gleamed in his big sad eyes that seemed in a red flicker to burn themselves out in his black face, and then he would lie blinded and invisible in the midst of an intense darkness. He could hear on the quiet deck soft footfalls, the breathing of some man lounging on the doorstep; the low creak of swaying masts; or the calm voice of the watch-officer reverberating aloft, hard and loud, amongst the unstirring sails. He listened with avidity, taking a rest in the attentive perception of the slightest sound from the fatiguing wanderings of his sleeplessness. He was cheered by the rattling of blocks, reassured by the stir and murmur of the watch, soothed by the slow yawn of some sleepy and weary seaman settling himself deliberately for a snooze on the planks. Life seemed an indestructible thing. It went on in darkness, in sunshine, in sleep; tireless, it hovered affectionately round the imposture of his ready death. It was bright, like the twisted flare of lightning, and more full of surprises than the dark night. It made him safe, and the calm of its overpowering darkness was as precious as its restless and dangerous light.</p>
			<p>But in the evening, in the dogwatches, and even far into the first night-watch, a knot of men could always be seen congregated before Jimmy‚Äôs cabin. They leaned on each side of the door peacefully interested and with crossed legs; they stood astride the doorstep discoursing, or sat in silent couples on his sea-chest; while against the bulwark along the spare topmast, three or four in a row stared meditatively, with their simple faces lit up by the projected glare of Jimmy‚Äôs lamp. The little place, repainted white, had, in the night, the brilliance of a silver shrine where a black idol, reclining stiffly under a blanket, blinked its weary eyes and received our homage. Donkin officiated. He had the air of a demonstrator showing a phenomenon, a manifestation bizarre, simple, and meritorious that, to the beholders, should be a profound and an everlasting lesson. ‚ÄúJust look at ‚Äôim, ‚Äôee knows what‚Äôs what‚ÅÝ‚Äînever fear!‚Äù he exclaimed now and then, flourishing a hand hard and fleshless like the claw of a snipe. Jimmy, on his back, smiled with reserve and without moving a limb. He affected the languor of extreme weakness, so as to make it manifest to us that our delay in hauling him out from his horrible confinement, and then that night spent on the poop among our selfish neglect of his needs, had ‚Äúdone for him.‚Äù He rather liked to talk about it, and of course we were always interested. He spoke spasmodically, in fast rushes with long pauses between, as a tipsy man walks.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ ‚ÄúCook had just given me a pannikin of hot coffee.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Slapped it down there, on my chest‚ÅÝ‚Äîbanged the door to.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I felt a heavy roll coming; tried to save my coffee, burnt my fingers‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ and fell out of my bunk.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ She went over so quick.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Water came in through the ventilator.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I couldn‚Äôt move the door‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ dark as a grave‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ tried to scramble up into the upper berth.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Rats‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ a rat bit my finger as I got up.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I could hear him swimming below me.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I thought you would never come‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I thought you were all gone overboard‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ of course‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Could hear nothing but the wind.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Then you came‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ to look for the corpse, I suppose. A little more and‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMan! But ye made a rare lot of noise in here,‚Äù observed Archie, thoughtfully.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou chaps kicked up such a confounded row above.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Enough to scare anyone.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I didn‚Äôt know what you were up to.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Bash in the blamed planks‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ my head.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Just what a silly, scary gang of fools would do.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Not much good to me anyhow.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Just as well‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ drown.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Pah.‚Äù</p>
			<p>He groaned, snapped his big white teeth, and gazed with scorn. Belfast lifted a pair of dolorous eyes, with a brokenhearted smile, clenched his fists stealthily; blue-eyed Archie caressed his red whiskers with a hesitating hand; the boatswain at the door stared a moment, and brusquely went away with a loud guffaw. Wamibo dreamed.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Donkin felt all over his sterile chin for the few rare hairs, and said, triumphantly, with a sidelong glance at Jimmy:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúLook at ‚Äôim! Wish I was ‚Äôarf has ‚Äôealthy as ‚Äôee is‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI do.‚Äù He jerked a short thumb over his shoulder towards the after end of the ship. ‚ÄúThat‚Äôs the blooming way to do ‚Äôem!‚Äù he yelped, with forced heartiness. Jimmy said:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúDon‚Äôt be a dam‚Äô fool,‚Äù in a pleasant voice. Knowles, rubbing his shoulder against the doorpost, remarked shrewdly:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúWe can‚Äôt all go an‚Äô be took sick‚ÅÝ‚Äîit would be mutiny.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúMutiny‚ÅÝ‚Äîgawn!‚Äù jeered Donkin, ‚Äúthere‚Äôs no bloomin‚Äô law against bein‚Äô sick.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúThere‚Äôs six weeks‚Äô hard for refoosing dooty,‚Äù argued Knowles, ‚ÄúI mind I once seed in Cardiff the crew of an overloaded ship‚ÅÝ‚Äîleastways she weren‚Äôt overloaded, only a fatherly old gentleman with a white beard and an umbreller came along the quay and talked to the hands. Said as how it was crool hard to be drownded in winter just for the sake of a few pounds more for the owner‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe said. Nearly cried over them‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe did; and he had a square mainsail coat, and a gaff-topsail hat too‚ÅÝ‚Äîall proper. So they chaps they said they wouldn‚Äôt go to be drownded in winter‚ÅÝ‚Äîdepending upon that ‚Äôere Plimsoll man to see ‚Äôem through the court. They thought to have a bloomin‚Äô lark and two or three days‚Äô spree. And the beak giv‚Äô ‚Äôem six weeks‚ÅÝ‚Äîcoss the ship warn‚Äôt overloaded. Anyways they made it out in court that she wasn‚Äôt. There wasn‚Äôt one overloaded ship in Penarth Dock at all. ‚ÄôPears that old coon he was only on pay and allowance from some kind people, under orders to look for overloaded ships, and he couldn‚Äôt see no further than the length of his umbreller. Some of us in the boardinghouse, where I live when I‚Äôm looking for a ship in Cardiff, stood by to duck that old weeping sponger in the dock. We kept a good lookout, too‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut he topped his boom directly he was outside the court.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Yes. They got six weeks‚Äô hard.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>They listened, full of curiosity, nodding in the pauses their rough pensive faces. Donkin opened his mouth once or twice, but restrained himself. Jimmy lay still with open eyes and not at all interested. A seaman emitted the opinion that after a verdict of atrocious partiality ‚Äúthe bloomin‚Äô beaks go an‚Äô drink at the skipper‚Äôs expense.‚Äù Others assented. It was clear, of course. Donkin said:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúWell, six weeks ain‚Äôt much trouble. You sleep all night in, reg‚Äôlar, in chokey. Do it on my ‚Äôead.‚Äù ‚ÄúYou are used to it ainch‚Äôee, Donkin?‚Äù asked somebody. Jimmy condescended to laugh. It cheered up everyone wonderfully. Knowles, with surprising mental agility, shifted his ground. ‚ÄúIf we all went sick what would become of the ship? eh?‚Äù He posed the problem and grinned all round.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúLet ‚Äôer go to ‚Äôell,‚Äù sneered Donkin. ‚ÄúDamn ‚Äôer. She ain‚Äôt yourn.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúWhat? Just let her drift?‚Äù insisted Knowles in a tone of unbelief.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúAye! Drift, an‚Äô be blowed,‚Äù affirmed Donkin with fine recklessness. The other did not see it‚ÅÝ‚Äîmeditated.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúThe stores would run out,‚Äù he muttered, ‚Äúand‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ never get anywhere‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ and what about payday?‚Äù he added with greater assurance.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúJack likes a good payday,‚Äù exclaimed a listener on the doorstep. ‚ÄúAye, because then the girls put one arm round his neck an‚Äô t‚Äôother in his pocket, and call him ducky. Don‚Äôt they, Jack?‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúJack, you‚Äôre a terror with the gals.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúHe takes three of ‚Äôem in tow to once, like one of ‚Äôem Watkinses two-funnel tugs waddling away with three schooners behind.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúJack, you‚Äôre a lame scamp.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúJack, tell us about that one with a blue eye and a black eye. Do.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúThere‚Äôs plenty of girls with one black eye along the Highway by‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚Äî‚ÄúNo, that‚Äôs a speshul one‚ÅÝ‚Äîcome, Jack.‚Äù Donkin looked severe and disgusted; Jimmy very bored; a grey-haired sea-dog shook his head slightly, smiling at the bowl of his pipe, discreetly amused. Knowles turned about bewildered; stammered first at one, then at another.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúNo!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I never!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ can‚Äôt talk sensible sense midst you.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Always on the kid.‚Äù He retired bashfully‚ÅÝ‚Äîmuttering and pleased. They laughed, hooting in the crude light, around Jimmy‚Äôs bed, where on a white pillow his hollowed black face moved to and fro restlessly. A puff of wind came, made the flame of the lamp leap, and outside, high up, the sails fluttered, while near by the block of the foresheet struck a ringing blow on the iron bulwark. A voice far off cried, ‚ÄúHelm up!‚Äù another, more faint, answered, ‚ÄúHard-up, sir!‚Äù They became silent‚ÅÝ‚Äîwaited expectantly. The grey-haired seaman knocked his pipe on the doorstep and stood up. The ship leaned over gently and the sea seemed to wake up, murmuring drowsily. ‚ÄúHere‚Äôs a little wind comin‚Äô,‚Äù said someone very low. Jimmy turned over slowly to face the breeze. The voice in the night cried loud and commanding:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúHaul the spanker out.‚Äù The group before the door vanished out of the light. They could be heard tramping aft while they repeated with varied intonations:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúSpanker out!‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ ‚ÄúOut spanker, sir!‚Äù Donkin remained alone with Jimmy. There was a silence. Jimmy opened and shut his lips several times as if swallowing draughts of fresher air; Donkin moved the toes of his bare feet and looked at them thoughtfully.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAin‚Äôt you going to give them a hand with the sail?‚Äù asked Jimmy.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo. If six ov ‚Äôem ain‚Äôt ‚Äônough beef to set that blamed, rotten spanker, they ain‚Äôt fit to live,‚Äù answered Donkin in a bored, faraway voice, as though he had been talking from the bottom of a hole. Jimmy considered the conical, fowl-like profile with a queer kind of interest; he was leaning out of his bunk with the calculating, uncertain expression of a man who reflects how best to lay hold of some strange creature that looks as though it could sting or bite. But he said only:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúThe mate will miss you‚ÅÝ‚Äîand there will be ructions.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Donkin got up to go. ‚ÄúI will do for ‚Äôim some dark night; see if I don‚Äôt,‚Äù he said over his shoulder.</p>
			<p>Jimmy went on quickly:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúYou‚Äôre like a poll-parrot, like a screechin‚Äô poll-parrot.‚Äù Donkin stopped and cocked his head attentively on one side. His big ears stood out, transparent and veined, resembling the thin wings of a bat.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYuss?‚Äù he said, with his back towards Jimmy.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes! Chatter out all you know‚ÅÝ‚Äîlike‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ like a dirty white cockatoo.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Donkin waited. He could hear the other‚Äôs breathing, long and slow; the breathing of a man with a hundredweight or so on the breastbone. Then he asked calmly:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúWhat do I know?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat?‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ What I tell you‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ not much. What do you want‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ to talk about my health so‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt‚Äôs a blooming imposyshun. A bloomin‚Äô, stinkin‚Äô, first-class imposyshun‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut it don‚Äôt tyke me in. Not it.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Jimmy kept still. Donkin put his hands in his pockets, and in one slouching stride came up to the bunk.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI talk‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhat‚Äôs the odds. They ain‚Äôt men ‚Äôere‚ÅÝ‚Äîsheep they are. A driven lot of sheep. I ‚Äôold you up‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Vy not? You‚Äôre well orf.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI am‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I don‚Äôt say anything about that.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell. Let ‚Äôem see it. Let ‚Äôem larn what a man can do. I am a man, I know all about yer.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù Jimmy threw himself further away on the pillow; the other stretched out his skinny neck, jerked his bird face down at him as though pecking at the eyes. ‚ÄúI am a man. I‚Äôve seen the inside of every chokey in the Colonies rather‚Äôn give up my rights.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou are a jail-prop,‚Äù said Jimmy, weakly.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI am‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ an‚Äô proud of it, too. You! You ‚Äôaven‚Äôt the bloomin‚Äô nerve‚ÅÝ‚Äîso you inventyd this ‚Äôere dodge.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù He paused; then with marked afterthought accentuated slowly:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúYer ain‚Äôt sick‚ÅÝ‚Äîare yer?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo,‚Äù said Jimmy, firmly. ‚ÄúBeen out of sorts now and again this year,‚Äù he mumbled with a sudden drop in his voice.</p>
			<p>Donkin closed one eye, amicable and confidential. He whispered:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúYe ‚Äôave done this afore‚Äôaven‚Äôtchee?‚Äù Jimmy smiled‚ÅÝ‚Äîthen as if unable to hold back he let himself go:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúLast ship‚ÅÝ‚Äîyes. I was out of sorts on the passage. See? It was easy. They paid me off in Calcutta, and the skipper made no bones about it either.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I got my money all right. Laid up fifty-eight days! The fools! O Lord! The fools! Paid right off.‚Äù He laughed spasmodically. Donkin chimed in giggling. Then Jimmy coughed violently. ‚ÄúI am as well as ever,‚Äù he said, as soon as he could draw breath.</p>
			<p>Donkin made a derisive gesture. ‚ÄúIn course,‚Äù he said, profoundly, ‚Äúanyone can see that.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúThey don‚Äôt,‚Äù said Jimmy, gasping like a fish.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúThey would swallow any yarn,‚Äù affirmed Donkin.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúDon‚Äôt you let on too much,‚Äù admonished Jimmy in an exhausted voice.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúYour little gyme? Eh?‚Äù commented Donkin, jovially. Then with sudden disgust: ‚ÄúYer all for yerself, s‚Äôlong as ye‚Äôre right‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>So charged with egoism James Wait pulled the blanket up to his chin and lay still for a while. His heavy lips protruded in an everlasting black pout. ‚ÄúWhy are you so hot on making trouble?‚Äù he asked without much interest.</p>
			<p>‚Äú‚Ää‚ÄôCos it‚Äôs a bloomin‚Äô shayme. We are put upon‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ bad food, bad pay‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I want us to kick up a bloomin‚Äô row; a blamed ‚Äôowling row that would make ‚Äôem remember! Knocking people about‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ brain us indeed! Ain‚Äôt we men?‚Äù His altruistic indignation blazed. Then he said calmly:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúI‚Äôve been airing yer clothes.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúAll right,‚Äù said Jimmy, languidly, ‚Äúbring them in.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúGiv‚Äô us the key of your chest, I‚Äôll put ‚Äôem away for yer,‚Äù said Donkin with friendly eagerness.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúBring ‚Äôem in, I will put them away myself,‚Äù answered James Wait with severity. Donkin looked down, muttering.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ ‚ÄúWhat d‚Äôyou say? What d‚Äôyou say?‚Äù inquired Wait anxiously.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúNothink. The night‚Äôs dry, let ‚Äôem ‚Äôang out till the morning,‚Äù said Donkin, in a strangely trembling voice, as though restraining laughter or rage. Jimmy seemed satisfied.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúGive me a little water for the night in my mug‚ÅÝ‚Äîthere,‚Äù he said. Donkin took a stride over the doorstep.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúGit it yerself,‚Äù he replied in a surly tone. ‚ÄúYou can do it, unless you <em>are</em> sick.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúOf course I can do it,‚Äù said Wait, ‚Äúonly‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúWell, then, do it,‚Äù said Donkin, viciously, ‚Äúif yer can look after yer clothes, yer can look after yerself.‚Äù He went on deck without a look back.</p>
			<p>Jimmy reached out for the mug. Not a drop. He put it back gently with a faint sigh‚ÅÝ‚Äîand closed his eyes. He thought:‚ÅÝ‚ÄîThat lunatic Belfast will bring me some water if I ask. Fool. I am very thirsty.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ It was very hot in the cabin, and it seemed to turn slowly round, detach itself from the ship, and swing out smoothly into a luminous, arid space where a black sun shone, spinning very fast. A place without any water! No water! A policeman with the face of Donkin drank a glass of beer by the side of an empty well, and flew away flapping vigorously. A ship whose mastheads protruded through the sky and could not be seen, was discharging grain, and the wind whirled the dry husks in spirals along the quay of a dock with no water in it. He whirled along with the husks‚ÅÝ‚Äîvery tired and light. All his inside was gone. He felt lighter than the husks‚ÅÝ‚Äîand more dry. He expanded his hollow chest. The air streamed in, carrying away in its rush a lot of strange things that resembled houses, trees, people, lampposts.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ No more! There was no more air‚ÅÝ‚Äîand he had not finished drawing his long breath. But he was in jail! They were locking him up. A door slammed. They turned the key twice, flung a bucket of water over him‚ÅÝ‚ÄîPhoo! What for?</p>
			<p>He opened his eyes, thinking the fall had been very heavy for an empty man‚ÅÝ‚Äîempty‚ÅÝ‚Äîempty. He was in his cabin. Ah! All right! His face was streaming with perspiration, his arms heavier than lead. He saw the cook standing in the doorway, a brass key in one hand and a bright tin hook-pot in the other.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI have locked up the galley for the night,‚Äù said the cook, beaming benevolently. ‚ÄúEight bells just gone. I brought you a pot of cold tea for your night‚Äôs drinking, Jimmy. I sweetened it with some white cabin sugar, too. Well‚ÅÝ‚Äîit won‚Äôt break the ship.‚Äù</p>
			<p>He came in, hung the pot on the edge of the bunk, asked perfunctorily, ‚ÄúHow goes it?‚Äù and sat down on the box.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúH‚Äôm,‚Äù grunted Wait, inhospitably. The cook wiped his face with a dirty cotton rag, which, afterwards, he tied round his neck.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúThat‚Äôs how them firemen do in steamboats,‚Äù he said, serenely, and much pleased with himself. ‚ÄúMy work is as heavy as theirs‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI‚Äôm thinking‚ÅÝ‚Äîand longer hours. Did you ever see them down the stokehold? Like fiends they look‚ÅÝ‚Äîfiring‚ÅÝ‚Äîfiring‚ÅÝ‚Äîfiring‚ÅÝ‚Äîdown there.‚Äù</p>
			<p>He pointed his forefinger at the deck. Some gloomy thought darkened his shining face, fleeting, like the shadow of a travelling cloud over the light of a peaceful sea. The relieved watch tramped noisily forward, passing in a body across the sheen of the doorway. Someone cried, ‚ÄúGood night!‚Äù Belfast stopped for a moment and looked at Jimmy, quivering and speechless with repressed emotion. He gave the cook a glance charged with dismal foreboding, and vanished. The cook cleared his throat. Jimmy stared upwards and kept as still as a man in hiding.</p>
			<p>The night was clear, with a gentle breeze. Above the mastheads the resplendent curve of the Milky Way spanned the sky like a triumphal arch of eternal light, thrown over the dark pathway of the earth. On the forecastle head a man whistled with loud precision a lively jig, while another could be heard faintly, shuffling and stamping in time. There came from forward a confused murmur of voices, laughter‚ÅÝ‚Äîsnatches of song. The cook shook his head, glanced obliquely at Jimmy, and began to mutter. ‚ÄúAye. Dance and sing. That‚Äôs all they think of. I am surprised that Providence don‚Äôt get tired.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ They forget the day that‚Äôs sure to come‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ but you.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>Jimmy drank a gulp of tea, hurriedly, as though he had stolen it, and shrank under his blanket, edging away towards the bulkhead. The cook got up, closed the door, then sat down again and said distinctly:‚ÅÝ‚Äî</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhenever I poke my galley fire I think of you chaps‚ÅÝ‚Äîswearing, stealing, lying, and worse‚ÅÝ‚Äîas if there was no such thing as another world.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Not bad fellows, either, in a way,‚Äù he conceded, slowly; then, after a pause of regretful musing, he went on in a resigned tone:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúWell, well. They will have a hot time of it. Hot! Did I say? The furnaces of one of them White Star boats ain‚Äôt nothing to it.‚Äù</p>
			<p>He kept very quiet for a while. There was a great stir in his brain; an addled vision of bright outlines; an exciting row of rousing songs and groans of pain. He suffered, enjoyed, admired, approved. He was delighted, frightened, exalted‚ÅÝ‚Äîas on that evening (the only time in his life‚ÅÝ‚Äîtwenty-seven years ago; he loved to recall the number of years) when as a young man he had‚ÅÝ‚Äîthrough keeping bad company‚ÅÝ‚Äîbecome intoxicated in an East-end music-hall. A tide of sudden feeling swept him clean out of his body. He soared. He contemplated the secret of the hereafter. It commended itself to him. It was excellent; he loved it, himself, all hands, and Jimmy. His heart overflowed with tenderness, with comprehension, with the desire to meddle, with anxiety for the soul of that black man, with the pride of possessed eternity, with the feeling of might. Snatch him up in his arms and pitch him right into the middle of salvation‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ The black soul‚ÅÝ‚Äîblacker‚ÅÝ‚Äîbody‚ÅÝ‚Äîrot‚ÅÝ‚ÄîDevil. No! Talk‚ÅÝ‚Äîstrength‚ÅÝ‚ÄîSamson.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ There was a great din as of cymbals in his ears; he flashed through an ecstatic jumble of shining faces, lilies, prayer-books, unearthly joy, white skirts, gold harps, black coats, wings. He saw flowing garments, clean shaved faces, a sea of light‚ÅÝ‚Äîa lake of pitch. There were sweet scents, a smell of sulphur‚ÅÝ‚Äîred tongues of flame licking a white mist. An awesome voice thundered!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ It lasted three seconds.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúJimmy!‚Äù he cried in an inspired tone. Then he hesitated. A spark of human pity glimmered yet through the infernal fog of his supreme conceit.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat?‚Äù said James Wait, unwillingly. There was a silence. He turned his head just the least bit, and stole a cautious glance. The cook‚Äôs lips moved without a sound; his face was rapt, his eyes turned up. He seemed to be mentally imploring deck beams, the brass hook of the lamp, two cockroaches.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúLook here,‚Äù said Wait, ‚ÄúI want to go to sleep. I think I could.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThis is no time for sleep!‚Äù exclaimed the cook, very loud. He had prayerfully divested himself of the last vestige of his humanity. He was a voice‚ÅÝ‚Äîa fleshless and sublime thing, as on that memorable night‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe night when he went walking over the sea to make coffee for perishing sinners. ‚ÄúThis is no time for sleeping,‚Äù he repeated with exaltation. ‚ÄúI can‚Äôt sleep.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDon‚Äôt care damn,‚Äù said Wait, with factitious energy. ‚ÄúI can. Go an‚Äô turn in.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSwear‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ in the very jaws!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ In the very jaws! Don‚Äôt you see the everlasting fire‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ don‚Äôt you feel it? Blind, chockfull of sin! Repent, repent! I can‚Äôt bear to think of you. I hear the call to save you. Night and day. Jimmy, let me save you!‚Äù The words of entreaty and menace broke out of him in a roaring torrent. The cockroaches ran away. Jimmy perspired, wriggling stealthily under his blanket. The cook yelled.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ ‚ÄúYour days are numbered!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúGet out of this,‚Äù boomed Wait, courageously.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúPray with me!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúI won‚Äôt!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù The little cabin was as hot as an oven. It contained an immensity of fear and pain; an atmosphere of shrieks and moans; prayers vociferated like blasphemies and whispered curses. Outside, the men called by Charley, who informed them in tones of delight that there was a holy row going on in Jimmy‚Äôs place, crowded before the closed door, too startled to open it. All hands were there. The watch below had jumped out on deck in their shirts, as after a collision. Men running up, asked:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúWhat is it?‚Äù Others said:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúListen!‚Äù The muffled screaming went on:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúOn your knees! On your knees!‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúShut up!‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúNever! You are delivered into my hands.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Your life has been saved.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Purpose.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Mercy.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Repent.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúYou are a crazy fool!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúAccount of you‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ you‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Never sleep in this world, if I‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúLeave off.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúNo!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ stokehold‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ only think!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù Then an impassioned screeching babble where words pattered like hail.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúNo!‚Äù shouted Wait.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúYes. You are!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ No help.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Everybody says so.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúYou lie!‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúI see you dying this minnyt‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ before my eyes‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ as good as dead already.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúHelp!‚Äù shouted Jimmy, piercingly.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúNot in this valley‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ look upwards,‚Äù howled the other.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúGo away! Murder! Help!‚Äù clamoured Jimmy. His voice broke. There were moanings, low mutters, a few sobs.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat‚Äôs the matter now?‚Äù said a seldom-heard voice.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúFall back, men! Fall back, there!‚Äù repeated <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCreighton, sternly, pushing through.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúHere‚Äôs the old man,‚Äù whispered some.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúThe cook‚Äôs in there, sir,‚Äù exclaimed several, backing away. The door clattered open; a broad stream of light darted out on wondering faces; a warm whiff of vitiated air passed. The two mates towered head and shoulders above the spare, grey-haired man who stood revealed between them, in shabby clothes, stiff and angular, like a small carved figure, and with a thin, composed face. The cook got up from his knees. Jimmy sat high in the bunk, clasping his drawn-up legs. The tassel of the blue nightcap almost imperceptibly trembled over his knees. They gazed astonished at his long, curved back, while the white corner of one eye gleamed blindly at them. He was afraid to turn his head, he shrank within himself; and there was an aspect astounding and animal-like in the perfection of his expectant immobility. A thing of instinct‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe unthinking stillness of a scared brute. ‚ÄúWhat are you doing here?‚Äù asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBaker, sharply.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúMy duty,‚Äù said the cook, with ardour.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúYour‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ what?‚Äù began the mate. Captain Allistoun touched his arm lightly.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúI know his caper,‚Äù he said, in a low voice. ‚ÄúCome out of that, Podmore,‚Äù he ordered, aloud.</p>
			<p>The cook wrung his hands, shook his fists above his head, and his arms dropped as if too heavy. For a moment he stood distracted and speechless.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúNever,‚Äù he stammered, ‚ÄúI‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ he‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat‚ÅÝ‚Äîdo‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou‚ÅÝ‚Äîsay?‚Äù pronounced Captain Allistoun. ‚ÄúCome out at once‚ÅÝ‚Äîor‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúI am going,‚Äù said the cook, with a hasty and sombre resignation. He strode over the doorstep firmly‚ÅÝ‚Äîhesitated‚ÅÝ‚Äîmade a few steps. They looked at him in silence.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúI make you responsible!‚Äù he cried, desperately, turning half round. ‚ÄúThat man is dying. I make you‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúYou there yet?‚Äù called the master in a threatening tone.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúNo, sir,‚Äù he exclaimed, hurriedly, in a startled voice. The boatswain led him away by the arm; someone laughed; Jimmy lifted his head for a stealthy glance, and in one unexpected leap sprang out of his bunk; <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBaker made a clever catch and felt him very limp in his arms; the group at the door grunted with surprise.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúHe lies,‚Äù gasped Wait, ‚Äúhe talked about black devils‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe is a devil‚ÅÝ‚Äîa white devil‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI am all right.‚Äù He stiffened himself, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBaker, experimentally, let him go. He staggered a pace or two; Captain Allistoun watched him with a quiet and penetrating gaze; Belfast ran to his support. He did not appear to be aware of anyone near him; he stood silent for a moment, battling single-handed with a legion of nameless terrors, amidst the eager looks of excited men who watched him far off, utterly alone in the impenetrable solitude of his fear. The sea gurgled through the scuppers as the ship heeled over to a short puff of wind.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúKeep him away from me,‚Äù said James Wait at last in his fine baritone voice, and leaning with all his weight on Belfast‚Äôs neck. ‚ÄúI‚Äôve been better this last week:‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I am well‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I was going back to duty‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ tomorrow‚ÅÝ‚Äînow if you like‚ÅÝ‚ÄîCaptain.‚Äù Belfast hitched his shoulders to keep him upright.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo,‚Äù said the master, looking at him, fixedly. Under Jimmy‚Äôs armpit Belfast‚Äôs red face moved uneasily. A row of eyes gleaming stared on the edge of light. They pushed one another with elbows, turned their heads, whispered. Wait let his chin fall on his breast and, with lowered eyelids, looked round in a suspicious manner.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhy not?‚Äù cried a voice from the shadows, ‚Äúthe man‚Äôs all right, sir.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI am all right,‚Äù said Wait, with eagerness. ‚ÄúBeen sick‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ better‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ turn-to now.‚Äù He sighed.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúHowly Mother!‚Äù exclaimed Belfast with a heave of the shoulders, ‚Äústand up, Jimmy.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúKeep away from me then,‚Äù said Wait, giving Belfast a petulant push, and reeling fetched against the doorpost. His cheekbones glistened as though they had been varnished. He snatched off his nightcap, wiped his perspiring face with it, flung it on the deck. ‚ÄúI am coming out,‚Äù he declared without stirring.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo. You don‚Äôt,‚Äù said the master, curtly. Bare feet shuffled, disapproving voices murmured all round; he went on as if he had not heard:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúYou have been skulking nearly all the passage and now you want to come out. You think you are near enough to the pay-table now. Smell the shore, hey?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôve been sick‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ now‚ÅÝ‚Äîbetter,‚Äù mumbled Wait, glaring in the light.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúYou have been shamming sick,‚Äù retorted Captain Allistoun with severity; ‚ÄúWhy‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù he hesitated for less than half a second. ‚ÄúWhy, anybody can see that. There‚Äôs nothing the matter with you, but you choose to lie-up to please yourself‚ÅÝ‚Äîand now you shall lie-up to please me. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBaker, my orders are that this man is not to be allowed on deck to the end of the passage.‚Äù</p>
			<p>There were exclamations of surprise, triumph, indignation. The dark group of men swung across the light. ‚ÄúWhat for?‚Äù ‚ÄúTold you so‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù ‚ÄúBloomin‚Äô shame‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúWe‚Äôve got to say somethink about that,‚Äù screeched Donkin from the rear.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúNever mind, Jim‚ÅÝ‚Äîwe will see you righted,‚Äù cried several together. An elderly seaman stepped to the front. ‚ÄúD‚Äôye mean to say, sir,‚Äù he asked, ominously, ‚Äúthat a sick chap ain‚Äôt allowed to get well in this ‚Äôere hooker?‚Äù Behind him Donkin whispered excitedly amongst a staring crowd where no one spared him a glance, but Captain Allistoun shook a forefinger at the angry bronzed face of the speaker.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúYou‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou hold your tongue,‚Äù he said, warningly.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúThis isn‚Äôt the way,‚Äù clamoured two or three younger men.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúAre we bloomin‚Äô masheens?‚Äù inquired Donkin in a piercing tone, and dived under the elbows of the front rank.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúSoon show ‚Äôim we ain‚Äôt boys‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúThe man‚Äôs a man if he is black.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúWe ain‚Äôt goin‚Äô to work this bloomin‚Äô ship shorthanded if Snowball‚Äôs all right‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúHe says he is.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúWell then, strike, boys, strike!‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúThat‚Äôs the bloomin‚Äô ticket.‚Äù Captain Allistoun said sharply to the second mate: ‚ÄúKeep quiet, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCreighton,‚Äù and stood composed in the tumult, listening with profound attention to mixed growls and screeches, to every exclamation and every curse of the sudden outbreak. Somebody slammed the cabin door to with a kick; the darkness full of menacing mutters leaped with a short clatter over the streak of light, and the men became gesticulating shadows that growled, hissed, laughed excitedly. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBaker whispered:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúGet away from them, sir.‚Äù The big shape of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCreighton hovered silently about the slight figure of the master.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúWe have been hymposed upon all this voyage,‚Äù said a gruff voice, ‚Äúbut this ‚Äôere fancy takes the cake.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúThat man is a shipmate.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúAre we bloomin‚Äô kids?‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúThe port watch will refuse duty.‚Äù Charley carried away by his feeling whistled shrilly, then yelped:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúGiv‚Äô us our Jimmy!‚Äù This seemed to cause a variation in the disturbance. There was a fresh burst of squabbling uproar. A lot of quarrels were set going at once.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúYes.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúNo.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúNever been sick.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúGo for them to once.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúShut yer mouth, youngster‚ÅÝ‚Äîthis is men‚Äôs work.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúIs it?‚Äù muttered Captain Allistoun, bitterly. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBaker grunted: ‚ÄúOugh! They‚Äôre gone silly. They‚Äôve been simmering for the last month.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúI did notice,‚Äù said the master.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúThey have started a row amongst themselves now,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCreighton with disdain, ‚Äúbetter get aft, sir. We will soothe them.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúKeep your temper, Creighton,‚Äù said the master. And the three men began to move slowly towards the cabin door.</p>
			<p>In the shadows of the fore rigging a dark mass stamped, eddied, advanced, retreated. There were words of reproach, encouragement, unbelief, execration. The elder seamen, bewildered and angry, growled their determination to go through with something or other; but the younger school of advanced thought exposed their and Jimmy‚Äôs wrongs with confused shouts, arguing amongst themselves. They clustered round that moribund carcass, the fit emblem of their aspirations, and encouraging one another they swayed, they tramped on one spot, shouting that they would not be ‚Äúput upon.‚Äù Inside the cabin, Belfast, helping Jimmy into his bunk, twitched all over in his desire not to miss all the row, and with difficulty restrained the tears of his facile emotion. James Wait, flat on his back under the blanket, gasped complaints.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúWe will back you up, never fear,‚Äù assured Belfast, busy about his feet.‚ÅÝ‚Äî</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôll come out tomorrow morning‚ÅÝ‚Äîtake my chance‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou fellows must‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù mumbled Wait, ‚ÄúI come out tomorrow‚ÅÝ‚Äîskipper or no skipper.‚Äù He lifted one arm with great difficulty, passed the hand over his face; ‚ÄúDon‚Äôt you let that cook‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù he breathed out.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúNo, no,‚Äù said Belfast, turning his back on the bunk, ‚ÄúI will put a head on him if he comes near you.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúI will smash his mug!‚Äù exclaimed faintly Wait, enraged and weak; ‚ÄúI don‚Äôt want to kill a man, but‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù He panted fast like a dog after a run in sunshine. Someone just outside the door shouted, ‚ÄúHe‚Äôs as fit as any ov us!‚Äù Belfast put his hand on the door-handle.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúHere!‚Äù called James Wait, hurriedly, and in such a clear voice that the other spun round with a start. James Wait, stretched out black and deathlike in the dazzling light, turned his head on the pillow. His eyes stared at Belfast, appealing and impudent. ‚ÄúI am rather weak from lying-up so long,‚Äù he said, distinctly. Belfast nodded. ‚ÄúGetting quite well now,‚Äù insisted Wait.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúYes. I noticed you getting better this‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ last month,‚Äù said Belfast, looking down. ‚ÄúHallo! What‚Äôs this?‚Äù he shouted and ran out.</p>
			<p>He was flattened directly against the side of the house by two men who lurched against him. A lot of disputes seemed to be going on all round. He got clear and saw three indistinct figures standing along in the fainter darkness under the arched foot of the mainsail, that rose above their heads like a convex wall of a high edifice. Donkin hissed:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúGo for them‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ it‚Äôs dark!‚Äù The crowd took a short run aft in a body‚ÅÝ‚Äîthen there was a check. Donkin, agile and thin, flitted past with his right arm going like a windmill‚ÅÝ‚Äîand then stood still suddenly with his arm pointing rigidly above his head. The hurtling flight of some heavy object was heard; it passed between the heads of the two mates, bounded heavily along the deck, struck the after hatch with a ponderous and deadened blow. The bulky shape of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBaker grew distinct. ‚ÄúCome to your senses, men!‚Äù he cried, advancing at the arrested crowd. ‚ÄúCome back, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBaker!‚Äù called the master‚Äôs quiet voice. He obeyed unwillingly. There was a minute of silence, then a deafening hubbub arose. Above it Archie was heard energetically:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúIf ye do oot ageen I wull tell!‚Äù There were shouts. ‚ÄúDon‚Äôt!‚Äù ‚ÄúDrop it!‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúWe ain‚Äôt that kind!‚Äù The black cluster of human forms reeled against the bulwark, back again towards the house. Ringbolts rang under stumbling feet.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúDrop it!‚Äù ‚ÄúLet me!‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúNo!‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúCurse you‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ hah!‚Äù Then sounds as of someone‚Äôs face being slapped; a piece of iron fell on the deck; a short scuffle, and someone‚Äôs shadowy body scuttled rapidly across the main hatch before the shadow of a kick. A raging voice sobbed out a torrent of filthy language‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ ‚Äî‚ÄúThrowing things‚ÅÝ‚Äîgood God!‚Äù grunted <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBaker in dismay.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúThat was meant for me,‚Äù said the master, quietly; ‚ÄúI felt the wind of that thing; what was it‚ÅÝ‚Äîan iron belaying-pin?‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúBy Jove!‚Äù muttered <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCreighton. The confused voices of men talking amidships mingled with the wash of the sea, ascended between the silent and distended sails seemed to flow away into the night, further than the horizon, higher than the sky. The stars burned steadily over the inclined mastheads. Trails of light lay on the water, broke before the advancing hull, and, after she had passed, trembled for a long time as if in awe of the murmuring sea.</p>
			<p>Meantime the helmsman, anxious to know what the row was about, had let go the wheel, and, bent double, ran with long, stealthy footsteps to the break of the poop. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Narcissus</i>, left to herself, came up gently in to the wind without anyone being aware of it. She gave a slight roll, and the sleeping sails woke suddenly, coming all together with a mighty flap against the masts, then filled again one after another in a quick succession of loud reports that ran down the lofty spars, till the collapsed mainsail flew out last with a violent jerk. The ship trembled from trucks to keel; the sails kept on rattling like a discharge of musketry; the chain sheets and loose shackles jingled aloft in a thin peal; the gin blocks groaned. It was as if an invisible hand had given the ship an angry shake to recall the men that peopled her decks to the sense of reality, vigilance, and duty.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúHelm up!‚Äù cried the master, sharply. ‚ÄúRun aft, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCreighton, and see what that fool there is up to.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúFlatten in the head sheets. Stand by the weather fore-braces,‚Äù growled <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBaker. Startled men ran swiftly repeating the orders. The watch below, abandoned all at once by the watch on deck, drifted towards the forecastle in twos and threes, arguing noisily as they went‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúWe shall see tomorrow!‚Äù cried a loud voice, as if to cover with a menacing hint an inglorious retreat. And then only orders were heard, the falling of heavy coils of rope, the rattling of blocks. Singleton‚Äôs white head flitted here and there in the night, high above the deck, like the ghost of a bird.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúGoing off, sir!‚Äù shouted <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCreighton from aft.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúFull again.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúAll right‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúEase off the head sheets. That will do the braces. Coil the ropes up,‚Äù grunted <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBaker, bustling about.</p>
			<p>Gradually the tramping noises, the confused sound of voices, died out, and the officers, coming together on the poop, discussed the events. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBaker was bewildered and grunted; <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCreighton was calmly furious; but Captain Allistoun was composed and thoughtful. He listened to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBaker‚Äôs growling argumentation, to Creighton‚Äôs interjected and severe remarks, while looking down on the deck he weighed in his hand the iron belaying-pin‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat a moment ago had just missed his head‚ÅÝ‚Äîas if it had been the only tangible fact of the whole transaction. He was one of those commanders who speak little, seem to hear nothing, look at no one‚ÅÝ‚Äîand know everything, hear every whisper, see every fleeting shadow of their ship‚Äôs life. His two big officers towered above his lean, short figure; they talked over his head; they were dismayed, surprised, and angry, while between them the little quiet man seemed to have found his taciturn serenity in the profound depths of a larger experience. Lights were burning in the forecastle; now and then a loud gust of babbling chatter came from forward, swept over the decks, and became faint, as if the unconscious ship, gliding gently through the great peace of the sea, had left behind and forever the foolish noise of turbulent mankind. But it was renewed again and again. Gesticulating arms, profiles of heads with open mouths appeared for a moment in the illuminated squares of doorways; black fists darted‚ÅÝ‚Äîwithdrew‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ ‚ÄúYes. It was most damnable to have such an unprovoked row sprung on one,‚Äù assented the master.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ A tumult of yells rose in the light, abruptly ceased.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ He didn‚Äôt think there would be any further trouble just then.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ A bell was struck aft, another, forward, answered in a deeper tone, and the clamour of ringing metal spread round the ship in a circle of wide vibrations that ebbed away into the immeasurable night of an empty sea.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Didn‚Äôt he know them! Didn‚Äôt he! In past years. Better men, too. Real men to stand by one in a tight place. Worse than devils too sometimes‚ÅÝ‚Äîdownright, horned devils. Pah! This‚ÅÝ‚Äînothing. A miss as good as a mile.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ The wheel was being relieved in the usual way‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúFull and by,‚Äù said, very loud, the man going off.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúFull and by,‚Äù repeated the other, catching hold of the spokes.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúThis head wind is my trouble,‚Äù exclaimed the master, stamping his foot in sudden anger; ‚Äúhead wind! all the rest is nothing.‚Äù He was calm again in a moment. ‚ÄúKeep them on the move tonight, gentlemen; just to let them feel we‚Äôve got hold all the time‚ÅÝ‚Äîquietly, you know. Mind you keep your hands off them, Creighton. Tomorrow I will talk to them like a Dutch uncle. A crazy crowd of tinkers! Yes, tinkers! I could count the real sailors amongst them on the fingers of one hand. Nothing will do but a row‚ÅÝ‚Äîif‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou‚ÅÝ‚Äîplease.‚Äù He paused. ‚ÄúDid you think I had gone wrong there, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBaker?‚Äù He tapped his forehead, laughed short. ‚ÄúWhen I saw him standing there, three parts dead and so scared‚ÅÝ‚Äîblack amongst that gaping lot‚ÅÝ‚Äîno grit to face what‚Äôs coming to us all‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe notion came to me all at once, before I could think. Sorry for him‚ÅÝ‚Äîlike you would be for a sick brute. If ever creature was in a mortal funk to die!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I thought I would let him go out in his own way. Kind of impulse. It never came into my head, those fools.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ H‚Äôm! Stand to it now‚ÅÝ‚Äîof course.‚Äù He stuck the belaying-pin in his pocket, seemed ashamed of himself, then sharply:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúIf you see Podmore at his tricks again tell him I will have him put under the pump. Had to do it once before. The fellow breaks out like that now and then. Good cook though.‚Äù He walked away quickly, came back to the companion. The two mates followed him through the starlight with amazed eyes. He went down three steps, and changing his tone, spoke with his head near the deck:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúI shan‚Äôt turn in tonight, in case of anything; just call out if‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Did you see the eyes of that sick nigger, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBaker? I fancied he begged me for something. What? Past all help. One lone black beggar amongst the lot of us, and he seemed to look through me into the very hell. Fancy, this wretched Podmore! Well, let him die in peace. I am master here after all. Let him be. He might have been half a man once‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Keep a good lookout.‚Äù He disappeared down below, leaving his mates facing one another, and more impressed than if they had seen a stone image shed a miraculous tear of compassion over the incertitudes of life and death.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
			<p>In the blue mist spreading from twisted threads that stood upright in the bowls of pipes, the forecastle appeared as vast as a hall. Between the beams a heavy cloud stagnated; and the lamps surrounded by halos burned each at the core of a purple glow in two lifeless flames without rays. Wreaths drifted in denser wisps. Men sprawled about on the deck, sat in negligent poses, or, bending a knee, drooped with one shoulder against a bulkhead. Lips moved, eyes flashed, waving arms made sudden eddies in the smoke. The murmur of voices seemed to pile itself higher and higher as if unable to run out quick enough through the narrow doors. The watch below in their shirts, and striding on long white legs, resembled raving somnambulists; while now and then one of the watch on deck would rush in, looking strangely overdressed, listen a moment, fling a rapid sentence into the noise and run out again; but a few remained near the door, fascinated, and with one ear turned to the deck. ‚ÄúStick together, boys,‚Äù roared Davis. Belfast tried to make himself heard. Knowles grinned in a slow, dazed way. A short fellow with a thick clipped beard kept on yelling periodically:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúWho‚Äôs afeard? Who‚Äôs afeard?‚Äù Another one jumped up, excited, with blazing eyes, sent out a string of unattached curses and sat down quietly. Two men discussed familiarly, striking one another‚Äôs breast in turn, to clinch arguments. Three others, with their heads in a bunch, spoke all together with a confidential air, and at the top of their voices. It was a stormy chaos of speech where intelligible fragments tossing, struck the ear. One could hear:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúIn the last ship‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúWho cares? Try it on any one of us if‚ÅÝ‚Äî.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúKnock under‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúNot a hand‚Äôs turn‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúHe says he is all right‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúI always thought‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúNever mind.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù Donkin, crouching all in a heap against the bowsprit, hunched his shoulderblades as high as his ears, and hanging a peaked nose, resembled a sick vulture with ruffled plumes. Belfast, straddling his legs, had a face red with yelling, and with arms thrown up, figured a Maltese cross. The two Scandinavians, in a corner, had the dumbfounded and distracted aspect of men gazing at a cataclysm. And, beyond the light, Singleton stood in the smoke, monumental, indistinct, with his head touching the beam; like a statue of heroic size in the gloom of a crypt.</p>
			<p>He stepped forward, impassive and big. The noise subsided like a broken wave: but Belfast cried once more with uplifted arms:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúThe man is dying I tell ye!‚Äù then sat down suddenly on the hatch and took his head between his hands. All looked at Singleton, gazing upwards from the deck, staring out of dark corners, or turning their heads with curious glances. They were expectant and appeased as if that old man, who looked at no one, had possessed the secret of their uneasy indignations and desires, a sharper vision, a clearer knowledge. And indeed standing there amongst them, he had the uninterested appearance of one who had seen multitudes of ships, had listened many times to voices such as theirs, had already seen all that could happen on the wide seas. They heard his voice rumble in his broad chest as though the words had been rolling towards them out of a rugged past. ‚ÄúWhat do you want to do?‚Äù he asked. No one answered. Only Knowles muttered‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúAye, aye,‚Äù and somebody said low:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúIt‚Äôs a bloomin‚Äô shame.‚Äù He waited, made a contemptuous gesture.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúI have seen rows aboard ship before some of you were born,‚Äù he said, slowly, ‚Äúfor something or nothing; but never for such a thing.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúThe man is dying, I tell ye,‚Äù repeated Belfast, woefully, sitting at Singleton‚Äôs feet.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúAnd a black fellow, too,‚Äù went on the old seaman, ‚ÄúI have seen them die like flies.‚Äù He stopped, thoughtful, as if trying to recollect gruesome things, details of horrors, hecatombs of niggers. They looked at him fascinated. He was old enough to remember slavers, bloody mutinies, pirates perhaps; who could tell through what violences and terrors he had lived! What would he say? He said:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúYou can‚Äôt help him; die he must.‚Äù He made another pause. His moustache and beard stirred. He chewed words, mumbled behind tangled white hairs; incomprehensible and exciting, like an oracle behind a veil.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ ‚Äî‚ÄúStop ashore‚ÅÝ‚Äîsick.‚ÅÝ‚ÄîInstead‚ÅÝ‚Äîbringing all this head wind. Afraid. The sea will have her own.‚ÅÝ‚ÄîDie in sight of land. Always so. They know it‚ÅÝ‚Äîlong passage‚ÅÝ‚Äîmore days, more dollars.‚ÅÝ‚ÄîYou‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>He seemed to wake up from a dream. ‚ÄúYou can‚Äôt help yourselves,‚Äù he said, austerely, ‚ÄúSkipper‚Äôs no fool. He has something in his mind. Look out‚ÅÝ‚Äîsay! I know ‚Äôem!‚Äù With eyes fixed in front he turned his head from right to left, from left to right, as if inspecting a long row of astute skippers.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äú‚Ää‚ÄôEe said ‚Äôee would brain me!‚Äù cried Donkin in a heartrending tone. Singleton peered downwards with puzzled attention, as though he couldn‚Äôt find him.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúDamn you!‚Äù he said, vaguely, giving it up. He radiated unspeakable wisdom, hard unconcern, the chilling air of resignation. Round him all the listeners felt themselves somehow completely enlightened by their disappointment, and mute, they lolled about with the careless ease of men who can discern perfectly the irremediable aspect of their existence. He, profound and unconscious, waved his arm once, and strode out on deck without another word.</p>
			<p>Belfast was lost in a round-eyed meditation. One or two vaulted heavily into upper berths, and, once there, sighed; others dived head first inside lower bunks‚ÅÝ‚Äîswift, and turning round instantly upon themselves, like animals going into lairs. The grating of a knife scraping burnt clay was heard. Knowles grinned no more. Davis said, in a tone of ardent conviction: ‚ÄúThen our skipper‚Äôs looney.‚Äù Archie muttered: ‚ÄúMy faith! we haven‚Äôt heard the last of it yet!‚Äù Four bells were struck.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúHalf our watch below gone!‚Äù cried Knowles in alarm, then reflected. ‚ÄúWell, two hours‚Äô sleep is something towards a rest,‚Äù he observed, consolingly. Some already pretended to slumber; and Charley, sound asleep, suddenly said a few slurred words in an arbitrary, blank voice.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúThis blamed boy has worrums!‚Äù commented Knowles from under a blanket, in a learned manner. Belfast got up and approached Archie‚Äôs berth.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúWe pulled him out,‚Äù he whispered, sadly.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúWhat?‚Äù said the other, with sleepy discontent.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúAnd now we will have to chuck him overboard,‚Äù went on Belfast, whose lower lip trembled.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúChuck what?‚Äù asked Archie.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúPoor Jimmy,‚Äù breathed out Belfast.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúHe be blowed!‚Äù said Archie with untruthful brutality, and sat up in his bunk; ‚ÄúIt‚Äôs all through him. If it hadn‚Äôt been for me, there would have been murder on board this ship!‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äú‚Ää‚ÄôTain‚Äôt his fault, is it?‚Äù argued Belfast, in a murmur; ‚ÄúI‚Äôve put him to bed‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ an‚Äô he ain‚Äôt no heavier than an empty beef-cask,‚Äù he added, with tears in his eyes. Archie looked at him steadily, then turned his nose to the ship‚Äôs side with determination. Belfast wandered about as though he had lost his way in the dim forecastle, and nearly fell over Donkin. He contemplated him from on high for a while. ‚ÄúAin‚Äôt ye going to turn in?‚Äù he asked. Donkin looked up hopelessly.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúThat black‚Äôearted Scotch son of a thief kicked me!‚Äù he whispered from the floor, in a tone of utter desolation.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúAnd a good job, too!‚Äù said Belfast, still very depressed; ‚ÄúYou were as near hanging as damn-it tonight, sonny. Don‚Äôt you play any of your murthering games around my Jimmy! You haven‚Äôt pulled him out. You just mind! ‚ÄôCos if I start to kick you‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe brightened up a bit‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äúif I start to kick you, it will be Yankee fashion‚ÅÝ‚Äîto break something!‚Äù He tapped lightly with his knuckles the top of the bowed head. ‚ÄúYou moind that, my bhoy!‚Äù he concluded, cheerily. Donkin let it pass.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúWill they split on me?‚Äù he asked, with pained anxiety.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúWho‚ÅÝ‚Äîsplit?‚Äù hissed Belfast, coming back a step. ‚ÄúI would split your nose this minyt if I hadn‚Äôt Jimmy to look after! Who d‚Äôye think we are?‚Äù Donkin rose and watched Belfast‚Äôs back lurch through the doorway. On all sides invisible men slept, breathing calmly. He seemed to draw courage and fury from the peace around him. Venomous and thin-faced, he glared from the ample misfit of borrowed clothes as if looking for something he could smash. His heart leaped wildly in his narrow chest. They slept! He wanted to wring necks, gouge eyes, spit on faces. He shook a dirty pair of meagre fists at the smoking lights. ‚ÄúYe‚Äôre no men!‚Äù he cried, in a deadened tone. No one moved. ‚ÄúYer ‚Äôaven‚Äôt the pluck of a mouse!‚Äù His voice rose to a husky screech. Wamibo darted out a dishevelled head, and looked at him wildly. ‚ÄúYe‚Äôre sweepings ov ships! I ‚Äôope you will all rot before you die!‚Äù Wamibo blinked, uncomprehending but interested. Donkin sat down heavily; he blew with force through quivering nostrils, he ground and snapped his teeth, and, with the chin pressed hard against the breast, he seemed busy gnawing his way through it, as if to get at the heart within.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>In the morning the ship, beginning another day of her wandering life, had an aspect of sumptuous freshness, like the springtime of the earth. The washed decks glistened in a long clear stretch; the oblique sunlight struck the yellow brasses in dazzling splashes, darted over the polished rods in lines of gold, and the single drops of salt water forgotten here and there along the rail were as limpid as drops of dew, and sparkled more than scattered diamonds. The sails slept, hushed by a gentle breeze. The sun, rising lonely and splendid in the blue sky, saw a solitary ship gliding close-hauled on the blue sea.</p>
			<p>The men pressed three deep abreast of the mainmast and opposite the cabin-door. They shuffled, pushed, had an irresolute mien and stolid faces. At every slight movement Knowles lurched heavily on his short leg. Donkin glided behind backs, restless and anxious, like a man looking for an ambush. Captain Allistoun came out on the quarterdeck suddenly. He walked to and fro before the front. He was grey, slight, alert, shabby in the sunshine, and as hard as adamant. He had his right hand in the side-pocket of his jacket, and also something heavy in there that made folds all down that side. One of the seamen cleared his throat ominously.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúI haven‚Äôt till now found fault with you men,‚Äù said the master, stopping short. He faced them with his worn, steely gaze, that by a universal illusion looked straight into every individual pair of the twenty pairs of eyes before his face. At his back <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBaker, gloomy and bull-necked, grunted low; <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCreighton, fresh as paint, had rosy cheeks and a ready, resolute bearing. ‚ÄúAnd I don‚Äôt now,‚Äù continued the master; ‚Äúbut I am here to drive this ship and keep every man-jack aboard of her up to the mark. If you knew your work as well as I do mine, there would be no trouble. You‚Äôve been braying in the dark about ‚ÄòSee tomorrow morning!‚Äô Well, you see me now. What do you want?‚Äù He waited, stepping quickly to and fro, giving them searching glances. What did they want? They shifted from foot to foot, they balanced their bodies; some, pushing back their caps, scratched their heads. What did they want? Jimmy was forgotten; no one thought of him, alone forward in his cabin, fighting great shadows, clinging to brazen lies, chuckling painfully over his transparent deceptions. No, not Jimmy; he was more forgotten than if he had been dead. They wanted great things. And suddenly all the simple words they knew seemed to be lost forever in the immensity of their vague and burning desire. They knew what they wanted, but they could not find anything worth saying. They stirred on one spot, swinging, at the end of muscular arms, big tarry hands with crooked fingers. A murmur died out.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúWhat is it‚ÅÝ‚Äîfood?‚Äù asked the master, ‚Äúyou know the stores have been spoiled off the Cape.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúWe know that, sir,‚Äù said a bearded shellback in the front rank.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúWork too hard‚ÅÝ‚Äîeh? Too much for your strength?‚Äù he asked again. There was an offended silence.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúWe don‚Äôt want to go shorthanded, sir,‚Äù began at last Davis in a wavering voice, ‚Äúand this ‚Äôere black.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúEnough!‚Äù cried the master. He stood scanning them for a moment, then walking a few steps this way and that began to storm at them coldly, in gusts violent and cutting like the gales of those icy seas that had known his youth.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúTell you what‚Äôs the matter? Too big for your boots. Think yourselves damn good men. Know half your work. Do half your duty. Think it too much. If you did ten times as much it wouldn‚Äôt be enough.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúWe did our best by her, sir,‚Äù cried someone with shaky exasperation.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúYour best,‚Äù stormed on the master; ‚ÄúYou hear a lot on shore, don‚Äôt you? They don‚Äôt tell you there your best isn‚Äôt much to boast of. I tell you‚ÅÝ‚Äîyour best is no better than bad. You can do no more? No, I know, and say nothing. But you stop your caper or I will stop it for you. I am ready for you! Stop it!‚Äù He shook a finger at the crowd. ‚ÄúAs to that man,‚Äù he raised his voice very much; ‚Äúas to that man, if he puts his nose out on deck without my leave I will clap him in irons. There!‚Äù The cook heard him forward, ran out of the galley lifting his arms, horrified, unbelieving, amazed, and ran in again. There was a moment of profound silence during which a bowlegged seaman, stepping aside, expectorated decorously into the scupper. ‚ÄúThere is another thing,‚Äù said the master, calmly. He made a quick stride and with a swing took an iron belaying-pin out of his pocket. ‚ÄúThis!‚Äù His movement was so unexpected and sudden that the crowd stepped back. He gazed fixedly at their faces, and some at once put on a surprised air as though they had never seen a belaying-pin before. He held it up. ‚ÄúThis is my affair. I don‚Äôt ask you any questions, but you all know it; it has got to go where it came from.‚Äù His eyes became angry. The crowd stirred uneasily. They looked away from the piece of iron, they appeared shy, they were embarrassed and shocked as though it had been something horrid, scandalous, or indelicate, that in common decency should not have been flourished like this in broad daylight. The master watched them attentively. ‚ÄúDonkin,‚Äù he called out in a short, sharp tone.</p>
			<p>Donkin dodged behind one, then behind another, but they looked over their shoulders and moved aside. The ranks kept on opening before him, closing behind, till at last he appeared alone before the master as though he had come up through the deck. Captain Allistoun moved close to him. They were much of a size, and at short range the master exchanged a deadly glance with the beady eyes. They wavered.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúYou know this?‚Äù asked the master.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúNo, I don‚Äôt,‚Äù answered the other, with cheeky trepidation.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúYou are a cur. Take it,‚Äù ordered the master. Donkin‚Äôs arms seemed glued to his thighs; he stood, eyes front, as if drawn on parade. ‚ÄúTake it,‚Äù repeated the master, and stepped closer; they breathed on one another. ‚ÄúTake it,‚Äù said Captain Allistoun again, making a menacing gesture. Donkin tore away one arm from his side.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúVy are yer down on me?‚Äù he mumbled with effort and as if his mouth had been full of dough.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúIf you don‚Äôt‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù began the master. Donkin snatched at the pin as though his intention had been to run away with it, and remained stock still holding it like a candle. ‚ÄúPut it back where you took it from,‚Äù said Captain Allistoun, looking at him fiercely. Donkin stepped back opening wide eyes. ‚ÄúGo, you blackguard, or I will make you,‚Äù cried the master, driving him slowly backwards by a menacing advance. He dodged, and with the dangerous iron tried to guard his head from a threatening fist. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBaker ceased grunting for a moment.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúGood! By Jove,‚Äù murmured appreciatively <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCreighton in the tone of a connoisseur.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúDon‚Äôt tech me,‚Äù snarled Donkin, backing away.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúThen go. Go faster.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúDon‚Äôt yer ‚Äôit me.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I will pull yer up afore the magistryt.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I‚Äôll show yer up.‚Äù Captain Allistoun made a long stride, and Donkin, turning his back fairly, ran off a little, then stopped and over his shoulder showed yellow teeth.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúFurther on, fore-rigging,‚Äù urged the master, pointing with his arm.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúAre yer goin‚Äô to stand by and see me bullied?‚Äù screamed Donkin at the silent crowd that watched him. Captain Allistoun walked at him smartly. He started off again with a leap, dashed at the fore-rigging, rammed the pin into its hole violently. ‚ÄúI‚Äôll be even with yer yet,‚Äù he screamed at the ship at large and vanished beyond the foremast. Captain Allistoun spun round and walked back aft with a composed face, as though he had already forgotten the scene. Men moved out of his way. He looked at no one.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúThat will do, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBaker. Send the watch below,‚Äù he said, quietly. ‚ÄúAnd you men try to walk straight for the future,‚Äù he added in a calm voice. He looked pensively for a while at the backs of the impressed and retreating crowd. ‚ÄúBreakfast, steward,‚Äù he called in a tone of relief through the cabin door.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúI didn‚Äôt like to see you‚ÅÝ‚ÄîOugh!‚ÅÝ‚Äîgive that pin to that chap, sir,‚Äù observed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBaker; ‚Äúhe could have bust‚ÅÝ‚ÄîOugh!‚ÅÝ‚Äîbust your head like an eggshell with it.‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúO! he!‚Äù muttered the master, absently. ‚ÄúQueer lot,‚Äù he went on in a low voice. ‚ÄúI suppose it‚Äôs all right now. Can never tell though nowadays, with such a‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Years ago; I was a young master then‚ÅÝ‚Äîone China voyage I had a mutiny; real mutiny, Baker. Different men though. I knew what they wanted: they wanted to broach the cargo and get at the liquor. Very simple.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ We knocked them about for two days, and when they had enough‚ÅÝ‚Äîgentle as lambs. Good crew. And a smart trip I made.‚Äù He glanced aloft at the yards braced sharp up. ‚ÄúHead wind day after day,‚Äù he exclaimed, bitterly. ‚ÄúShall we never get a decent slant this passage?‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúReady, sir,‚Äù said the steward, appearing before them as if by magic and with a stained napkin in his hand.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúAh! All right. Come along, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBaker‚ÅÝ‚Äîit‚Äôs late‚ÅÝ‚Äîwith all this nonsense.‚Äù</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
