<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>To My Readers in America</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="preface-1" epub:type="preface">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To My Readers in America</h2>
			<p>From that evening when James Wait joined the ship⁠—late for the muster of the crew⁠—to the moment when he left us in the open sea, shrouded in sailcloth, through the open port, I had much to do with him. He was in my watch. A negro in a British forecastle is a lonely being. He has no chums. Yet James Wait, afraid of death and making her his accomplice was an impostor of some character⁠—mastering our compassion, scornful of our sentimentalism, triumphing over our suspicions.</p>
			<p>But in the book he is nothing; he is merely the centre of the ship’s collective psychology and the pivot of the action. Yet he, who in the family circle and amongst my friends is familiarly referred to as the Nigger, remains very precious to me. For the book written round him is not the sort of thing that can be attempted more than once in a lifetime. It is the book by which, not as a novelist perhaps, but as an artist striving for the utmost sincerity of expression, I am willing to stand or fall. Its pages are the tribute of my unalterable and profound affection for the ships, the seamen, the winds and the great sea⁠—the moulders of my youth, the companions of the best years of my life.</p>
			<p>After writing the last words of that book, in the revulsion of feeling before the accomplished task, I understood that I had done with the sea, and that henceforth I had to be a writer. And almost without laying down the pen I wrote a preface, trying to express the spirit in which I was entering on the task of my new life. That preface on advice (which I now think was wrong) was never published with the book. But the late <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. E.</abbr> Henley, who had the courage at that time (1897) to serialize my <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Nigger</i> in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">New Review</i> judged it worthy to be printed as an afterword at the end of the last instalment of the tale.</p>
			<p>I am glad that this book which means so much to me is coming out again, under its proper title of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Nigger of the Narcissus</i> and under the auspices of my good friends and publishers <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Messrs.</abbr> Doubleday, Page &amp; <abbr>Co.</abbr> into the light of publicity.</p>
			<p>Half the span of a generation has passed since <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. E.</abbr> Henley, after reading two chapters, sent me a verbal message: “Tell Conrad that if the rest is up to the sample it shall certainly come out in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">New Review</i>.” The most gratifying recollection of my writer’s life!</p>
			<p>And here is the Suppressed Preface.</p>
			<footer>
				<p epub:type="z3998:signature">Joseph Conrad</p>
				<p>1914</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
